Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental plasma process of key importance to several fields.
Reconnection at Earthâ€™s magnetopause drives magnetospheric convection and provides mass and energy
input into the magnetosphere/ionosphere system.  Despite this importance, the factors governing the
location of dayside magnetopause reconnection are not well understood. Though a few models can
predict X-line locations reasonably well the underlying physics is still unresolved. In this study
we present results from analysis of several reconnection regions observed by MMS, to determine what
quantities are most strongly associated with the occurrence of dayside magnetopause reconnection. We
also attempt to answer under what upstream conditions are global X-line models least reliable.  The
eventual goal of the project is to quantify the dependence of each model on different states of
plasma, both terrestrial as well as solar wind as well as attempt to answer the question "Under what
plasma conditions do each model work best?". 

As solar wind slams into the earth's magnetic field, the magnetic topology gets rearranged and
magnetic energy is converted to kinetic energy, thermal energy, and particle acceleration. This is
called the magnetic reconnection.  Though reconnection can occur at any place where two different
magnetic fields are present, it is often assumed that the locus of point of reconnection on the
day-side magnetopause is a line, which we refer to as X-line.  Under the tacit assumption that
X-line is a continuous structure, there are several models in literature (see next section) that
predict the location of X-lines on the day-side megnetopause. Each of these models maximizes a
specific parameter to find the orientation and location of X-lines.

In this study, we chose the following models for comparative analysis:
1. Maximum magnetic shear [Trattner et al., 2007]


2. Maximum reconnecting field energy [Hesse et al., 2013]


3. Local field bisection [Moore et al., 2002]


4. Maximum exhaust speed [Swisdak and Drake, 2007]

Solar Wind data: OMNI [propagated to magnetopause] Magnetosheath field: Models [Cooling 2001]
         Magnetopause location: Models [Shue 1998] Magnetospheric field: Models [Tsyganenko 1996 and
IGRF] Observational data: MMS [FPI and FGM]

1. Identify magnetopause crossings by MMS. We rely on database maintained by Haaland et al. for this
   dataset.
2. Check if: a) Crossing is close to sub-solar point (within 5 RE) b) If Walen relation is satisfied

3. Determine if ion-jet reversal occurred during MMS crossing of magnetopause.
4. Using data from models and observations, compute the value of each parameter (shear, magnetic
   field energy, bisection field, and the exhaust speed. 
5. Find the location and orientation of X-line as predicted by each model.
6. Measure distance from MMS.

Figure 3. The above figure shows different parameters (shear, normalized reconnection energy,
exhaust velocity, and bisection field)  plotted on (y,z)-plane along the magnetopause. Cyan line is
the predicted location and orientation of the X-line by respective models. Gray circle marks the
terminator location. 

MMS spacecraft is shows in white circle. The red arrow is the direction of magnetosheath magnetic
field as measured by MMS. This is also the direction along which distance to X-line, from MMS, is
measured for each model, which is shown in cyan color in earth radii units. Time of observation is
displayed at the top, along with the average IMF at that instant. 

Figure 4. In Figure 3,  Shear model seem to have the best agreement with the observed data, whereas
in the current figure, for similar location of MMS with respect to sub-solar point but a slightly
different IMF conditions, reconnection energy model seem to give the best result, followed by
bi-section model. 

Figure 6. Histogram of measured distance between predicted and actual location of X-line for 4
different models.  Reconnection energy model seems to do the best job of predicting the location of
X-line on day-side magnetopause. However, because of limited amount of data used in this study so
far (32 reconnection events), at present we remain reluctant in making  any such assertion.  We are
working towards identifying more ion-jet reversal events which will help us improve our statistics
and refine our conclusion.

Figure 5.  As shown in this figure., based on preliminary results, most models seem to have
comparatively poor predictability when Bz (IMF) is > 0 and Bx is the dominant component.  All models
except bisection field, predicted X-line outside the terminator. If reconnection is indeed happening
at those locations, MMS is too far to observe ion-jets from those places and most definitely did not
cross predicted X-line to observe jet reversal.  We would also like to note that since the
interspacecraft distance of MMS is very small compared to Earth's radius, use of different MMS
spacecraft (for example, MMS3 instead of MMS1) has no perceivable effect on the computed distance.
We also found little difference when we used T-96  and T-01 models for computing the external
magnetic field of Earth's Magnetosphere. 